README.md, before:

# ft_otp

[![Build Status](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-None-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/language-Python-blue.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp)

> 🔐 A simple Time-based One-Time Password (TOTP) generator implemented **from scratch in Python**, using only standard libraries.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Key Features](#key-features)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Credits](#credits)

---

## Overview

**ft_otp** is a minimalist Python implementation of **Time-based One-Time Passwords (TOTP)** compatible with the [RFC 6238](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6238) standard. It is written entirely with Python's **built-in libraries** (`hmac`, `hashlib`, `time`, `base64`), with no external dependencies for the core logic.

This project was created for educational purposes (notably for the **42 School "ft_otp" project**) to demonstrate how TOTP works internally without relying on third-party libraries like `pyotp`.

---

## Key Features

✅ Pure-Python implementation — uses only standard modules  
✅ Compatible with RFC 6238 (TOTP)  
✅ Generates 6-digit one-time passwords based on a shared secret  
✅ Works both as a **CLI** and optional **GUI** (bonus)  
✅ Optional encryption and key management features  
✅ Educational and easy to read / modify

---

## Installation

### Requirements

- Python **3.8+**
- `pip` (for optional dependencies)
- Standard library only for TOTP core
- (Bonus features require):
  - `tkinter` — for GUI
  - `qrcode` — to generate QR images
  - `Pillow` — to display generated QR codes
  - `cryptography` — to encrypt stored keys

### Setup

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp.git
cd ft_otp
```

Install dependencies (if using bonus features):

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Or manually install:

```bash
pip install qrcode pillow cryptography
```

---

## Usage

You can use ft_otp in two modes: CLI or GUI.

### Graphical Interface (GUI)

```bash
python ft_otp.py --gui
```

This launches a small graphical interface showing the current 6-digit TOTP, refreshing automatically every 30 seconds.

### Command-Line Interface (CLI)

**Example 1** — Generate a TOTP from a stored key:

```bash
python ft_otp.py -k ft_otp.key
```

**Example 2** — Generate a new random key and save it:

```bash
python ft_otp.py -g key.hex
```

**Example 3** — Interactive mode (update every N seconds):

```bash
python ft_otp.py -k ft_otp.key -i 30
```

**Example 4** — Encrypt or re-encrypt a key file:

```bash
python ft_otp.py -p <Base64Password>
```

---

## How It Works (Under the Hood)

The TOTP generation process follows these steps:

1. Decode the secret key (hexadecimal or base32)
2. Compute time counter = `int(time.time()) // interval`
3. Generate HMAC hash using the shared secret and counter value
4. Extract dynamic offset from the hash (RFC 4226 truncation)
5. Compute OTP = `(binary % 10^digits)`
6. Output a 6-digit code that changes every interval seconds

**Libraries used:**

- `hmac` — for cryptographic HMAC calculation
- `hashlib` — to use SHA-1, SHA-256, or SHA-512
- `struct` — for binary manipulation
- `time` — to compute time steps
- `base64` — for secret decoding (if encoded)

No external TOTP or OTP library (like `pyotp`) is used — everything is computed manually.

---

## Configuration

Environment variables and CLI options supported:

| Option / Env Var | Description | Default |
|---|---|---|
| `-k <keyfile>` | Path to the key file | — |
| `-g <file>` | Generate new key | — |
| `-i <seconds>` | Interval between codes | 30 |
| `-p <password>` | Encrypt / re-encrypt key file | — |
| `-rk` | Generate random 64-char hex key | — |
| `-rp` | Generate random base64 password | — |

---

## Project Structure

Typical structure of this repository:

```
ft_otp/
├── ft_otp.py             # Main entry point
├── core/                 # Internal logic (HMAC, encoding, key handling)
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies (for bonus part)
├── .gitignore
└── README.md
```

- **ft_otp.py** — implements CLI and orchestrates TOTP generation
- **core/** — includes functions for hashing, key management, and encryption
- **requirements.txt** — optional dependencies for GUI and encryption

---

## Testing

To verify your implementation:

```bash
python ft_otp.py -k ft_otp.key
```

Then compare the generated code with one from a trusted app (Google Authenticator, Authy, etc.) using the same shared secret.

To automate tests:

```bash
pip install pytest
pytest -q
```

**Example test (RFC 6238 vectors):**

```python
import hmac, hashlib, struct, time

def test_totp_output():
    secret = bytes.fromhex("3132333435363738393031323334353637383930")
    interval = 30
    counter = int(time.time() // interval)
    msg = struct.pack(">Q", counter)
    h = hmac.new(secret, msg, hashlib.sha1).digest()
    offset = h[-1] & 0x0F
    code = (struct.unpack(">I", h[offset:offset+4])[0] & 0x7FFFFFFF) % 10**6
    assert isinstance(code, int)
```

---

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome!

1. Fork this repository
2. Create a new branch:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feat/my-feature
   ```
3. Commit changes and run tests
4. Submit a pull request

**Guidelines:**

- Follow PEP 8 coding style
- Add docstrings and inline comments
- Keep dependencies minimal
- Write clear commit messages

---

## License

⚠️ No license currently specified.

To make this project open source, add a LICENSE file (for example, MIT or Apache 2.0).

Until then, please do not redistribute without permission.

---

## Credits

- **Author:** ndahib
- **Project Origin:** 42 School — ft_otp project
- **Based on:** RFC 4226 (HOTP) and RFC 6238 (TOTP)
- **Core Libraries Used:** `hmac`, `hashlib`, `time`, `struct`, `base64`

---

## Suggested Improvements

- Add unit tests using RFC 6238 test vectors
- Include QR generation for Authenticator apps
- Add a LICENSE file
- Integrate GitHub Actions CI for tests
- Optionally release as a small pip package (`ft_otp`)

💡 *"Security through understanding — ft_otp shows how TOTP truly works."*

Commit message:

Revise README.md for GUI and CLI enhancements
Updated GUI and CLI instructions in README.md to reflect new features and examples. Added details about key generation, TOTP generation, and QR code generation.

README.md, after:

# ft_otp

[![Build Status](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp/actions/workflows/ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp/actions)
[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-None-lightgrey.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp)
[![Language](https://img.shields.io/badge/language-Python-blue.svg)](https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp)

> 🔐 A simple Time-based One-Time Password (TOTP) generator implemented **from scratch in Python**, using only standard libraries.

---

## Table of Contents

- [Overview](#overview)
- [Key Features](#key-features)
- [Installation](#installation)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
- [Project Structure](#project-structure)
- [Testing](#testing)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)
- [Credits](#credits)

---

## Overview

**ft_otp** is a minimalist Python implementation of **Time-based One-Time Passwords (TOTP)** compatible with the [RFC 6238](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6238) standard. It is written entirely with Python's **built-in libraries** (`hmac`, `hashlib`, `time`, `base64`), with no external dependencies for the core logic.

This project was created for educational purposes (notably for the **42 School "ft_otp" project**) to demonstrate how TOTP works internally without relying on third-party libraries like `pyotp`.

---

## Key Features

✅ Pure-Python implementation — uses only standard modules  
✅ Compatible with RFC 6238 (TOTP)  
✅ Generates 6-digit one-time passwords based on a shared secret  
✅ Works both as a **CLI** and optional **GUI** (bonus)  
✅ Optional encryption and key management features  
✅ Educational and easy to read / modify

---

## Installation

### Requirements

- Python **3.8+**
- `pip` (for optional dependencies)
- Standard library only for TOTP core
- (Bonus features require):
  - `tkinter` — for GUI
  - `qrcode` — to generate QR images
  - `Pillow` — to display generated QR codes
  - `cryptography` — to encrypt stored keys

### Setup

Clone the repository:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/ndahib/ft_otp.git
cd ft_otp
```

Install dependencies (if using bonus features):

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Or manually install:

```bash
pip install qrcode pillow cryptography
```

---

## Usage

You can use ft_otp in two modes: CLI or GUI.

### Graphical Interface (GUI)

```bash
python ft_otp.py
gui
```


This launches a small graphical interface showing with 2 buttons one for generating key and other for generating totp.

### Command-Line Interface (CLI)

**Example 1** — Generate a TOTP from a stored key:

```bash
python ft_otp.py
cli
```

**Example 2** — save and encrypt a new random key and save it:

```bash
 -g key.hex
```

**Example 3** — generate totp code with 6 digit :

```bash
-k ft_otp.key
```

**Example 4** — generate qr code and save it in image:

```bash
qr --key=ft_otp.key --account="alice@gmail.com" --issuer"ft_otp_user"
```

---

## How It Works (Under the Hood)

The TOTP generation process follows these steps:

1. Decode the secret key (hexadecimal or base32)
2. Compute time counter = `int(time.time()) // interval`
3. Generate HMAC hash using the shared secret and counter value
4. Extract dynamic offset from the hash (RFC 4226 truncation)
5. Compute OTP = `(binary % 10^digits)`
6. Output a 6-digit code that changes every interval seconds

**Libraries used:**

- `hmac` — for cryptographic HMAC calculation
- `hashlib` — to use SHA-1, SHA-256, or SHA-512
- `struct` — for binary manipulation
- `time` — to compute time steps
- `base64` — for secret decoding (if encoded)

No external TOTP or OTP library (like `pyotp`) is used — everything is computed manually.

---

## Configuration

Environment variables and CLI options supported:

| Option / Env Var | Description | Default |
|---|---|---|
| `-k <keyfile>` | Path to the key file | — |
| `-g <file>` | Generate new key | — |
| `-i <seconds>` | Interval between codes | 30 |
| `-p <password>` | Encrypt / re-encrypt key file | — |
| `-rk` | Generate random 64-char hex key | — |
| `-rp` | Generate random base64 password | — |

---

## Project Structure

Typical structure of this repository:

```
ft_otp/
├── ft_otp.py             # Main entry point
├── core/                 # Internal logic (HMAC, encoding, key handling)
├── requirements.txt      # Dependencies (for bonus part)
├── .gitignore
└── README.md
```

- **core/management/** — parse command line and orchestrate cli, gui choices
- **core/management/** —  includes functions for totp generation, qr image generation, key management, and encryption
- **requirements.txt** — optional dependencies for GUI and encryption

---

## Testing

To verify your implementation:

```bash
-k ft_otp.key
```

Then compare the generated code with one from a trusted app (Google Authenticator, Authy, etc.) using the same shared secret.

To automate tests:

```bash
pip install pytest
pytest -q
```

**Example test (RFC 6238 vectors):**

```python
import hmac, hashlib, struct, time

def test_totp_output():
    secret = bytes.fromhex("3132333435363738393031323334353637383930")
    interval = 30
    counter = int(time.time() // interval)
    msg = struct.pack(">Q", counter)
    h = hmac.new(secret, msg, hashlib.sha1).digest()
    offset = h[-1] & 0x0F
    code = (struct.unpack(">I", h[offset:offset+4])[0] & 0x7FFFFFFF) % 10**6
    assert isinstance(code, int)
```

---

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome!

1. Fork this repository
2. Create a new branch:
   ```bash
   git checkout -b feat/my-feature
   ```
3. Commit changes and run tests
4. Submit a pull request

**Guidelines:**

- Follow PEP 8 coding style
- Add docstrings and inline comments
- Keep dependencies minimal
- Write clear commit messages

---
## Credits

- **Author:** ndahib
- **Project Origin:** 42 School — ft_otp project
- **Based on:** RFC 4226 (HOTP) and RFC 6238 (TOTP)
- **Core Libraries Used:** `hmac`, `hashlib`, `time`, `struct`, `base64`

---

💡 *"Security through understanding — ft_otp shows how TOTP truly works."*
